Alexander III, having composed his differences with Frederick Barbarossa
and the Anti-pope, summoned, in _A.D._ 1179, the third Lateran Council.
It was described as "A magnificent Diet of the Christian world." Over one
thousand Bishops and Abbots (amongst them English[38], Irish[39] and
Scotch), were present, besides many of the inferior clergy and
representatives of Emperor and Kings. By its twenty-seventh Canon it
condemned the heretics of Gascony, Albi and the parts about Toulouse,
going under several names. If they died in sin no masses were to be said
for their souls, nor were they to receive Christian burial.[40] One
incident, however, at this Council, which received but scant notice at
the time, has an important bearing upon our subject. This was a
deputation of two Waldenses who begged official recognition of their
movement from the Pope. We are concerned here only with their doctrines,
which they professed to draw entirely from the Bible and the
authoritative utterances of the Saints (_auctoritates sanctorum_). Had
Alexander III been a Pope of statesmanlike prescience, the Preaching
Orders which eventually saved the Church might have been anticipated by
some thirty years. These Waldenses had no certain dwelling-place,
travelled barefoot, wore woollen clothes only, had no private property,
but "had all things in common," they followed naked the naked Christ. The
Pope, to whom they gave a book containing the text of the Psalter with
notes and several other books of "either Law," approved of their vow of
voluntary poverty, but refused them permission to preach, unless the
clergy (_sacerdotes_) asked them. Walter Mapes, an Englishman, afterwards
a Franciscan, tells us ("De Nugis" i. 31) that he met the Waldenses in
Rome. He calls them ignorant and unlearned, and by command of the Pope
entered into conversation with them, asking them at first the easiest
questions, e.g. "Did they believe in God the Father? and in the Son? and
in the Holy Ghost?" To each they answered, "We believe." "And in the
Mother of Christ?" But when they answered again, "We believe," they were
greeted with a general shout of laughter, and retired in confusion, "et
merito, quia a nullo regebantur et rectores appetebant fieri, Phaetonis
instar, qui nec nomina novit equorum." The Abbot of Urspegensis, in his
Chronicle (A.D. 1212), also mentions this petition of the Waldenses for
Papal recognition, adding that they wore capes, like the "religious," and
had long hair, unless they were "laymen." Men and women travelled
together, which caused considerable scandal. Yet they asserted all these
things came down from the Apostles.
